docs/i2c_driver.md, before:

# I2C Master Driver :id=i2c-master-driver

The I2C Master drivers used in QMK have a set of common functions to allow portability between MCUs.

## I2C Addressing :id=note-on-i2c-addresses

All of the addresses expected by this driver should be pushed to the upper 7 bits of the address byte. Setting
the lower bit (indicating read/write) will be done by the respective functions. Almost all I2C addresses listed 
on datasheets and the internet will be represented as 7 bits occupying the lower 7 bits and will need to be
shifted to the left (more significant) by one bit. This is easy to do via the bitwise shift operator `<< 1`.

You can either do this on each call to the functions below, or once in your definition of the address. For example, if your device has an address of `0x18`:

```c
#define MY_I2C_ADDRESS (0x18 << 1)
```

See https://www.robot-electronics.co.uk/i2c-tutorial for more information about I2C addressing and other technical details.

## AVR Configuration :id=avr-configuration

The following defines can be used to configure the I2C master driver:

|`config.h` Override|Description          |Default |
|-------------------|---------------------|--------|
|`F_SCL`            |Clock frequency in Hz|`400000`|

No further setup is required - just connect the `SDA` and `SCL` pins of your I2C devices to the matching pins on the MCU:

|MCU               |`SCL`|`SDA`|
|------------------|-----|-----|
|ATmega16/32U4     |`D0` |`D1` |
|AT90USB64/128     |`D0` |`D1` |
|ATmega32A         |`C0` |`C1` |
|ATmega328/P       |`C5` |`C4` |

?> The ATmega16/32U2 does not possess I2C functionality, and so cannot use this driver.

## ChibiOS/ARM Configuration :id=arm-configuration

You'll need to determine which pins can be used for I2C -- a an example, STM32 parts generally have multiple I2C peripherals, labeled I2C1, I2C2, I2C3 etc.

To enable I2C, modify your board's `halconf.h` to enable I2C:

```c
#define HAL_USE_I2C TRUE
```

Then, modify your board's `mcuconf.h` to enable the peripheral you've chosen, for example:

```c
#undef STM32_I2C_USE_I2C2
#define STM32_I2C_USE_I2C2 TRUE
```

|`mcuconf.h` Setting         |Description                                                                       |Default|
|----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
|`STM32_I2C_BUSY_TIMEOUT`    |Time in milliseconds until the I2C command is aborted if no response is received  |`50`   |
|`STM32_I2C_XXX_IRQ_PRIORITY`|Interrupt priority for hardware driver XXX (THIS IS AN EXPERT SETTING)            |`10`   |
|`STM32_I2C_USE_DMA`         |Enable/Disable the ability of the MCU to offload the data transfer to the DMA unit|`TRUE` |
|`STM32_I2C_XXX_DMA_PRIORITY`|Priority of DMA unit for hardware driver XXX (THIS IS AN EXPERT SETTING)          |`1`    |

Configuration-wise, you'll need to set up the peripheral as per your MCU's datasheet -- the defaults match the pins for a Proton-C, i.e. STM32F303.

|`config.h` Overrride    |Description                                                   |Default|
|------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
|`I2C_DRIVER`            |I2C peripheral to use - I2C1 -> `I2CD1`, I2C2 -> `I2CD2` etc. |`I2CD1`|
|`I2C1_SCL_PIN`          |The pin definition for SCL                                    |`B6`   |
|`I2C1_SCL_PAL_MODE`     |The alternate function mode for SCL                           |`4`    |
|`I2C1_SDA_PIN`          |The pin definition for SDA                                    |`B7`   |
|`I2C1_SDA_PAL_MODE`     |The alternate function mode for SDA                           |`4`    |

The following configuration values depend on the specific MCU in use.

### I2Cv1 :id=arm-configuration-i2cv1

* STM32F1xx
* STM32F2xx
* STM32F4xx
* STM32L0xx
* STM32L1xx

See [this page](https://www.playembedded.org/blog/stm32-i2c-chibios/#7_I2Cv1_configuration_structure) for the I2Cv1 configuration structure.

|`config.h` Override|Default         |
|-------------------|----------------|
|`I2C1_OPMODE`      |`OPMODE_I2C`    |
|`I2C1_CLOCK_SPEED` |`100000`        |
|`I2C1_DUTY_CYCLE`  |`STD_DUTY_CYCLE`|

### I2Cv2 :id=arm-configuration-i2cv2

* STM32F0xx
* STM32F3xx
* STM32F7xx
* STM32L4xx

See [this page](https://www.playembedded.org/blog/stm32-i2c-chibios/#8_I2Cv2_I2Cv3_configuration_structure) for the I2Cv2 configuration structure.

|`config.h` Override  |Default|
|---------------------|-------|
|`I2C1_TIMINGR_PRESC` |`0U`   |
|`I2C1_TIMINGR_SCLDEL`|`7U`   |
|`I2C1_TIMINGR_SDADEL`|`0U`   |
|`I2C1_TIMINGR_SCLH`  |`38U`  |
|`I2C1_TIMINGR_SCLL`  |`129U` |

## API :id=api

### `void i2c_init(void)` :id=api-i2c-init

Initialize the I2C driver. This function must be called only once, before any of the below functions can be called.

This function is weakly defined, meaning it can be overridden if necessary for your particular use case:

```c
void i2c_init(void) {
    setPinInput(B6); // Try releasing special pins for a short time
    setPinInput(B7);
    wait_ms(10); // Wait for the release to happen

    palSetPadMode(GPIOB, 6, PAL_MODE_ALTERNATE(4) | PAL_STM32_OTYPE_OPENDRAIN | PAL_STM32_PUPDR_PULLUP); // Set B6 to I2C function
    palSetPadMode(GPIOB, 7, PAL_MODE_ALTERNATE(4) | PAL_STM32_OTYPE_OPENDRAIN | PAL_STM32_PUPDR_PULLUP); // Set B7 to I2C function
}
```

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_start(uint8_t address, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-start

Start an I2C transaction.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-start-arguments

 - `uint8_t address`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device (ie. without the read/write bit - this will be set automatically).
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-start-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_transmit(uint8_t address, uint8_t *data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-transmit

Send multiple bytes to the selected I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-transmit-arguments

 - `uint8_t address`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint8_t *data`  
   A pointer to the data to transmit.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to write. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-transmit-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_receive(uint8_t address, uint8_t* data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-receive

Receive multiple bytes from the selected I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-receive-arguments

 - `uint8_t address`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint8_t *data`  
   A pointer to the buffer to read into.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to read. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-receive-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_writeReg(uint8_t devaddr, uint8_t regaddr, uint8_t* data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-writereg

Writes to a register with an 8-bit address on the I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-writereg-arguments

 - `uint8_t devaddr`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint8_t regaddr`  
   The register address to write to.
 - `uint8_t *data`  
   A pointer to the data to transmit.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to write. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-writereg-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_writeReg16(uint8_t devaddr, uint16_t regaddr, uint8_t* data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-writereg16

Writes to a register with a 16-bit address (big endian) on the I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-writereg16-arguments

 - `uint8_t devaddr`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint16_t regaddr`  
   The register address to write to.
 - `uint8_t *data`  
   A pointer to the data to transmit.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to write. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-writereg16-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_readReg(uint8_t devaddr, uint8_t regaddr, uint8_t* data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-readreg

Reads from a register with an 8-bit address on the I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-readreg-arguments

 - `uint8_t devaddr`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint8_t regaddr`  
   The register address to read from.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to read. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-readreg-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_readReg16(uint8_t devaddr, uint16_t regaddr, uint8_t* data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)`

Reads from a register with a 16-bit address (big endian) on the I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-readreg16-arguments

 - `uint8_t devaddr`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint16_t regaddr`  
   The register address to read from.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to read. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-readreg16-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_stop(void)` :id=api-i2c-stop

Stop the current I2C transaction.

Commit message:

Dedupe I2C, SPI, UART driver inclusions (#22253)

docs/i2c_driver.md, after:

# I2C Master Driver :id=i2c-master-driver

The I2C Master drivers used in QMK have a set of common functions to allow portability between MCUs.

## Usage :id=usage

In most cases, the I2C Master driver code is automatically included if you are using a feature or driver which requires it, such as [OLED](feature_oled_driver.md).

However, if you need to use the driver standalone, add the following to your `rules.mk`:

```make
I2C_DRIVER_REQUIRED = yes
```

You can then call the I2C API by including `i2c_master.h` in your code.

## I2C Addressing :id=note-on-i2c-addresses

All of the addresses expected by this driver should be pushed to the upper 7 bits of the address byte. Setting
the lower bit (indicating read/write) will be done by the respective functions. Almost all I2C addresses listed 
on datasheets and the internet will be represented as 7 bits occupying the lower 7 bits and will need to be
shifted to the left (more significant) by one bit. This is easy to do via the bitwise shift operator `<< 1`.

You can either do this on each call to the functions below, or once in your definition of the address. For example, if your device has an address of `0x18`:

```c
#define MY_I2C_ADDRESS (0x18 << 1)
```

See https://www.robot-electronics.co.uk/i2c-tutorial for more information about I2C addressing and other technical details.

## AVR Configuration :id=avr-configuration

The following defines can be used to configure the I2C master driver:

|`config.h` Override|Description          |Default |
|-------------------|---------------------|--------|
|`F_SCL`            |Clock frequency in Hz|`400000`|

No further setup is required - just connect the `SDA` and `SCL` pins of your I2C devices to the matching pins on the MCU:

|MCU               |`SCL`|`SDA`|
|------------------|-----|-----|
|ATmega16/32U4     |`D0` |`D1` |
|AT90USB64/128     |`D0` |`D1` |
|ATmega32A         |`C0` |`C1` |
|ATmega328/P       |`C5` |`C4` |

?> The ATmega16/32U2 does not possess I2C functionality, and so cannot use this driver.

## ChibiOS/ARM Configuration :id=arm-configuration

You'll need to determine which pins can be used for I2C -- a an example, STM32 parts generally have multiple I2C peripherals, labeled I2C1, I2C2, I2C3 etc.

To enable I2C, modify your board's `halconf.h` to enable I2C:

```c
#define HAL_USE_I2C TRUE
```

Then, modify your board's `mcuconf.h` to enable the peripheral you've chosen, for example:

```c
#undef STM32_I2C_USE_I2C2
#define STM32_I2C_USE_I2C2 TRUE
```

|`mcuconf.h` Setting         |Description                                                                       |Default|
|----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
|`STM32_I2C_BUSY_TIMEOUT`    |Time in milliseconds until the I2C command is aborted if no response is received  |`50`   |
|`STM32_I2C_XXX_IRQ_PRIORITY`|Interrupt priority for hardware driver XXX (THIS IS AN EXPERT SETTING)            |`10`   |
|`STM32_I2C_USE_DMA`         |Enable/Disable the ability of the MCU to offload the data transfer to the DMA unit|`TRUE` |
|`STM32_I2C_XXX_DMA_PRIORITY`|Priority of DMA unit for hardware driver XXX (THIS IS AN EXPERT SETTING)          |`1`    |

Configuration-wise, you'll need to set up the peripheral as per your MCU's datasheet -- the defaults match the pins for a Proton-C, i.e. STM32F303.

|`config.h` Overrride    |Description                                                   |Default|
|------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
|`I2C_DRIVER`            |I2C peripheral to use - I2C1 -> `I2CD1`, I2C2 -> `I2CD2` etc. |`I2CD1`|
|`I2C1_SCL_PIN`          |The pin definition for SCL                                    |`B6`   |
|`I2C1_SCL_PAL_MODE`     |The alternate function mode for SCL                           |`4`    |
|`I2C1_SDA_PIN`          |The pin definition for SDA                                    |`B7`   |
|`I2C1_SDA_PAL_MODE`     |The alternate function mode for SDA                           |`4`    |

The following configuration values depend on the specific MCU in use.

### I2Cv1 :id=arm-configuration-i2cv1

* STM32F1xx
* STM32F2xx
* STM32F4xx
* STM32L0xx
* STM32L1xx

See [this page](https://www.playembedded.org/blog/stm32-i2c-chibios/#7_I2Cv1_configuration_structure) for the I2Cv1 configuration structure.

|`config.h` Override|Default         |
|-------------------|----------------|
|`I2C1_OPMODE`      |`OPMODE_I2C`    |
|`I2C1_CLOCK_SPEED` |`100000`        |
|`I2C1_DUTY_CYCLE`  |`STD_DUTY_CYCLE`|

### I2Cv2 :id=arm-configuration-i2cv2

* STM32F0xx
* STM32F3xx
* STM32F7xx
* STM32L4xx

See [this page](https://www.playembedded.org/blog/stm32-i2c-chibios/#8_I2Cv2_I2Cv3_configuration_structure) for the I2Cv2 configuration structure.

|`config.h` Override  |Default|
|---------------------|-------|
|`I2C1_TIMINGR_PRESC` |`0U`   |
|`I2C1_TIMINGR_SCLDEL`|`7U`   |
|`I2C1_TIMINGR_SDADEL`|`0U`   |
|`I2C1_TIMINGR_SCLH`  |`38U`  |
|`I2C1_TIMINGR_SCLL`  |`129U` |

## API :id=api

### `void i2c_init(void)` :id=api-i2c-init

Initialize the I2C driver. This function must be called only once, before any of the below functions can be called.

This function is weakly defined, meaning it can be overridden if necessary for your particular use case:

```c
void i2c_init(void) {
    setPinInput(B6); // Try releasing special pins for a short time
    setPinInput(B7);
    wait_ms(10); // Wait for the release to happen

    palSetPadMode(GPIOB, 6, PAL_MODE_ALTERNATE(4) | PAL_STM32_OTYPE_OPENDRAIN | PAL_STM32_PUPDR_PULLUP); // Set B6 to I2C function
    palSetPadMode(GPIOB, 7, PAL_MODE_ALTERNATE(4) | PAL_STM32_OTYPE_OPENDRAIN | PAL_STM32_PUPDR_PULLUP); // Set B7 to I2C function
}
```

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_start(uint8_t address, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-start

Start an I2C transaction.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-start-arguments

 - `uint8_t address`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device (ie. without the read/write bit - this will be set automatically).
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-start-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_transmit(uint8_t address, uint8_t *data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-transmit

Send multiple bytes to the selected I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-transmit-arguments

 - `uint8_t address`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint8_t *data`  
   A pointer to the data to transmit.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to write. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-transmit-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_receive(uint8_t address, uint8_t* data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-receive

Receive multiple bytes from the selected I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-receive-arguments

 - `uint8_t address`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint8_t *data`  
   A pointer to the buffer to read into.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to read. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-receive-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_writeReg(uint8_t devaddr, uint8_t regaddr, uint8_t* data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-writereg

Writes to a register with an 8-bit address on the I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-writereg-arguments

 - `uint8_t devaddr`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint8_t regaddr`  
   The register address to write to.
 - `uint8_t *data`  
   A pointer to the data to transmit.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to write. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-writereg-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_writeReg16(uint8_t devaddr, uint16_t regaddr, uint8_t* data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-writereg16

Writes to a register with a 16-bit address (big endian) on the I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-writereg16-arguments

 - `uint8_t devaddr`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint16_t regaddr`  
   The register address to write to.
 - `uint8_t *data`  
   A pointer to the data to transmit.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to write. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-writereg16-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_readReg(uint8_t devaddr, uint8_t regaddr, uint8_t* data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)` :id=api-i2c-readreg

Reads from a register with an 8-bit address on the I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-readreg-arguments

 - `uint8_t devaddr`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint8_t regaddr`  
   The register address to read from.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to read. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-readreg-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_readReg16(uint8_t devaddr, uint16_t regaddr, uint8_t* data, uint16_t length, uint16_t timeout)`

Reads from a register with a 16-bit address (big endian) on the I2C device.

#### Arguments :id=api-i2c-readreg16-arguments

 - `uint8_t devaddr`  
   The 7-bit I2C address of the device.
 - `uint16_t regaddr`  
   The register address to read from.
 - `uint16_t length`  
 The number of bytes to read. Take care not to overrun the length of `data`.
 - `uint16_t timeout`  
   The time in milliseconds to wait for a response from the target device.

#### Return Value :id=api-i2c-readreg16-return

`I2C_STATUS_TIMEOUT` if the timeout period elapses, `I2C_STATUS_ERROR` if some other error occurs, otherwise `I2C_STATUS_SUCCESS`.

---

### `i2c_status_t i2c_stop(void)` :id=api-i2c-stop

Stop the current I2C transaction.
